Journal of Criminal Justice 63 [2019], Journal of Criminal Justice
Estimating the sex buying behavior of adult males in the United States:experiment and direct question estimates
Arthur: Dominique Roe-Sepowitzd; Stephanie Bontragerb, Justin T. Pickett”, Anna E. Kosloskid
ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT 
Keywords: Propose: Estimating the size of the sex buyer market in the United States has been stymied by methodological buyers and sampling challenges. Given known methodologiar] issues in self-reporting and the sensitive nature of Prostitution purchasing sex, cunent research faces challenges in providing estimates of demand for purchasing sex. This sex study used a unique approach to estimate the prevalence of sex buying by men over the age of 18 in die United States. Methods This study employed a double list experiment and a direct ask question to a nationally representative sample of 2525 adult males to estimate die size of the sex buyer market in die United States. Results: The double list experiment found the prevalence of sex purchasing is roughly 1 of every 50 adult males in the US. (2%) over the 3years. The direct ask questions found that roughly 1 of every 25 males in the U.S.(4%) had purchased sex in die past 3 years How they purchased and who they purchased sex from was also explored. A total of 30 respondents reported buying sex during the past 3years. They spent an average of $120 for their most recent sex-buying encounter. Most sex buyers reported buying sex from an ofﬂine venue (street, bar, or massage parlor) and 81% purchased sex from a female. Applying the estimate of sex buying behavior to the genera] male population in the U.S. results in approximately 4 million men over the age of 13 purchasing sex the past 3years.Commissions: The ﬁndings from both the double list experiment and the direct ask question indicate that buying sex is a relatively rare phenomenon among adult males, however, when accounting for  ultiple purchases and extrapolating to the entire population the estimated purchases is in the millions. Applying the double list experiment and a direct ask question to a nationally representative sample provides a new way to capture estimates while addressing some of the limitations of previous methods. Such ﬁndings have implications for both the criminal justice and public health sectors.

Introduction:
The commercial sex industry describes the proﬁt-driven market of transactional sex and sexual services. Within the industry a variety of direct (e.g. prostitution} and indirect sexual services (e.g. pornography and exotic dancing] transpire (Wcitzcr, 2012). The acts of selling and purchasing sex are illegal and under certain legal contexts, including the removal of consent through force, fraud or coercion or if a minor is involved in the act, are statutorily deﬁned as sex trafﬁcking crimes (Yu.2011). Debates about the normative and moral nature of the commercial sex industry are common features of academic research on this issue. Some inquiries characterize buying and selling sex as immoral, illegal and harmful -especially to women - while others argue that it is a personal, reasonable and private choice (see Gerassi, 2015; Moran 81 Farley, 2019; Wilson 8: Butler, 2014; Weitzer, 2012). While this exchange provides insight into the motives, perceptions and characteristics of those engaged in purchasing or providing sex, the scope and scale of the United States' sex market has yet to be deﬁnitively addressed by researchers. Recognizing that there are very strong and differing perspectives about the nature of exchanging money for sexual services, the purview of this study is narrowly focused on examining market features — speciﬁcally the demand for prostitution in the United States (US). This research does not engage the various positions on sex work, nor does it support or refute any speciﬁc arguments about the industry. Rather, the ‘Corresponding author at; School of Social Work, Arizona State University, Phoenix, AZ 85004, United States so the goal is to provide a new methodology in estimating the demand for sexual services that can utilized by researchers across theoretical and moral paradigms to understand the extent of purchasing behaviors within the commercial sex industry. Determining how many men within the US acquire services from a personal exchanging sex for money and how often they engage in this behavior is a complex endeavor. Sex markets are illegal throughout most of the country, and empirical efforts to understand industry dynamics have largely focused on sex trafﬁcking, victimization and intervention efforts. Further, the tension between opposing views of prostitution - trafﬁcking/slavery at one extreme and a natural right on the opposite - has created barriers to understanding buying/selling sex as a market like any other (Monto, 2004, Monto, 2010; Pinto, 2011; Shively, Kliorys, Wheeler, 3: Hunt, 2012). Finally, commercial sex studies are often restricted to women who sell sex, though in recent years researchers have begun to explore consumers as well [see Farley, MacLeod, Anderson, 8: Golding, 2011; Milrod s Monto, 2012; Monto, 2010]. Prior studies of sex buyers (also referred to as “consumers", “purchasers”, “solicitors” and “johns”) have focused primarily on exploring the characteristics and motives of men who pay for sex. A recent study of sex trafﬁcking in Denver encompassed both ofﬁcial arrest data on purchasers and law enforcement perceptions of the scope of demand for illegal commercial sex (Morris et al., 2012). The report found that sex purchasers were on average, 40 years old and most were white. Other research supports the contention that there are demographic similarities among consumers; most are males, many are married with children, between 30 and 50 years old, purchase at least once a year and come from diverse racial/ethnic backgrounds (Chicago Coalition for the Homeless, 2004; Durschlag 8: Goswami, 2008; Farley et al., 2011; Kosloski, Bontrager Ryan, 8: Roe-Sepowitz, 2017; Milrod 8: Monte, 2012; Monte, 2004; Shively et al., 2012). As noted by Morris et al.(2012) research ﬁndings about sex buyers are not robust to methodological deviations. Simply including arrested purchasers, a logical design choice, in their sample negated the relationship between marital status and soliciting sex {Morris et al., 2012). Research on the sex purchasers relies on speciﬁc geographic locations, using convenience samples or discrete moments in time to explore soliciting. For example, the Shapiro Group attempted to estimate how many men were buying sex from ‘young’ girls from online venues in Georgia. 'Nhile valuable information was gained from the research, their study did not result in a robust and replicable model (National Academy of Sciences, 2013; Pinto, 2011). Inquiries on the scope of sex buying among adult males, to date, rely exclusively on non-representative samples of the population, producing highly variable from less than 1% to over 16% - estimates of sex buyers in the US (Monto S: Milrod, 2014). Studies conducted in Chicago, Scotland, Las Vegas, Portland and Denver provide diverse descriptions of men who purchase sex, but none utilize a representative sample of solicitors and most operationalize soliciting as purchasing at any point in the past(Durschlag 8r Goswami, 2008; Farley et al., 20]]; Monto & McKee, 2005; Memo 8: Milrod, 2014; Morris et al., 2012). These studies fall short of generalizability and cannot estimate the number of active sex market consumers, but they have contributed to our collective understanding of purchasing methods, buyer motivations and solicitor characteristics. Building from this foundation, there is a clear directive for innovative approaches to ensure an accurate and generalizable assessment of the prevalence of sex purchasing in the US. This research employs a new survey approach for determining the number of sex buyers in the US based on a list item experiment and a direct ask question of potential male solicitors. This design, in combination with a representative sample of adult males, produces an 'Prostitute is die most common deﬁnition, but sex worker, call girl and escort also describe anyone who performs sexual services for payment. Journal of Criminal Justice 63 (2019) 4148 accurate and generalizable estimate of the percent of males within the US who have bought sex from a prostitute in the past Byears. Given changes to online purchasing platforms (e.g. moving from credit cards to Bitcoin) and how purchasers solicit sex (e.g. street, online, etc.), the survey also captures this information among this sample. Being able to reﬁne estimates of sex purchasing prevalence has important implications for research on the commercial sex industry, including the full range of sex work and sex trafﬁcking scholars. Moving beyond the labor versus slavery discussion, the emphasis here is on creating a new technique for understanding the extent of active sex buying in the US and enhancing our knowledge of the commercial sex market.

Literature review:
To date, research on sex buyers largely focuses on motives for purchasing sex and the demographic background of buyers. In doing so, researchers have discovered that some sex purchasers rationalize their behavior as ‘normal', they feel entitled as men to buy sex, they often hold negative views of women, and they are more likely than non-purchasers to harm their sexual partners (Durschlag Sc Goswanri, 2008; Farley et al., 2011; Janson, Durchslag, 8: Mann, 2013; Milrod 81 Monto, 2012; Monto, 2004, 2010; Monte 81 Hotaling, 2001; Shively et al., 2012). Sex buyers use indoor and outdoor methods for soliciting sex. Of individuals that admitted to purchasing sex a total of 63% of Farley et al. (2011) study participans indicated they approached women on the street to purchase sex. Purchasing online is a widely used method as advertisements for escorts and commercial sex are readily available from websites, forums, and social networking sites (Finn 8: Stalans, 2016; Holt 8: Blevins, 2007; Milrod S: Monto, 2012). Other sex buyers report seeking the encounter in bars, strip clubs, and massage parlors
(Farley et al., 2011). Research on prostitution purchasing behaviors largely comes from data collected at john schools:2 and online discussion boards. These studies reveal important information regarding the motives, attitudes, and practices for purchasing sex, however, they do not reﬂect the true extent of such practices within the United States. Research from the Urban 1nstitute indicates that these sources are unreliable since they are “only the tip of the iceberg for a largely hidden crime” (Dank et al., 2014, p.B). For this reason, recent attempts to provide more accurate information through survey data have been incorporated into research on demand for prostitution. Using a robust modeling technique, the following section describes a new technique for estimating and validating the number of sex buyers in the United States. 

Methods of estimate purchase:
In a review of 181 studies on commercial sex, Wilcox, Christmann, Rogerson, and Birch (2009) reported signiﬁcant methodological issues in estimating demand for prostitution. Given that prostitution is largely
illegal in the United States, controversial, stigmatizing, and buyers can solicit online and out of public view, estimates of purchasing behavior have been difﬁcult to assess (Monto & Milrod, 2014; Roe-Sepowitz, Bontrager Ryon, Hickle, Gallagher, 8: Hedberg, 2016; Wilcox et al., 2009). Attempts to ﬁne-tune the methodologies used to produce estimates of sex purchasing behaviors have included the use of large-scale surveys and a capture-recapture approach. Recent attempts to estimate the prevalence of the sex buyer population have utilized large-scale surveys. Monto and Milrod (2014) relied on the General Social Survey to pull from a nationally representative sample. The General Social Survey asks if respondents if they “have 2 John Schools are criminal justice sanctions similar to intimate partner violence classes. Participants learn about the dangers of buying sex and the harm to prostituted persons. Classes vary considerably but the goal is to stop further purchasing. D. Rprﬂs, er at ever paid for sex in their lifetime” and if they “paid for sex in the last year” in addition to general attitudinal questions regarding sex. Monto and Milrod (2014) concluded that roughly 14% of men between 18 and 75 years old, sampled between 2002 and 2010, reported having paid for sex during their lifetime. Additionally, they found that about 1% reported buying sex in the past year. Surveys especially for sensitive topics of inquiry are prone to under’ reporting (Brewer, Roberts, Moth, 8: Potterat. 2008). Relying on capture or recapture techniques, ecological modeling adapted to sociological phenomena, researchers have successfully estimated the number of drug users in London (llickman et al.. 2002). Simply, a sample is
observed at time 1 and compared to a similar sample within a geo-graphic region at time 2. The overlap of elements in the two groups is the recapture estimate (Larson, Stevens, 8: Wardlaw, 1994). Using the
same technique, Brewer et al. (2008) were the ﬁrst to attempt the complex task of creating an estimate of the size of the population of street prostitution customers in the United States using a capture-recapture method. This method used arrest records for prostitution in six cities in the United States and matched them with county data they estimated 2—3% percent of adult male residents in several large metropolitan areas in the United States patronized local street prostitutes (Brewer ct al., 2008). Roe Sepowitz et al. (2016) used a similar capture-recapture approach to study demand for prostitution online. In Invisﬂile Offenders: A Study of Online Sex Customers, Roe Scpowitz et al. (2016) placed decoy
ads on common solicitation websites for illegal commercial sex in 15 metropolitan cities. They then captured potential buyers telephone numbers when responding to the decoy ads. The data was dedentiﬁed and was then used for the capture-recapture calculation to create probability estimates of demand size in some metropolitan cities in the United States. They found that 1 out of every 20 males adult males in a metropolitan city area was soliciting online sex ads or that 3% of adult males in these cities were buying sex online. This capture-recapture approach used by Brewer et al. (2008) and Roe Sepowitz et al. (2016) does require knowing that either a charge has been ﬁled via ofﬁcial law enforcement records or that the intention of someone who contacts the ads is in fact to purchase sex. In using the capture-recapture method online, changes to soliciting website availability (e.g. Backpage.com) has limited the feasibility of this approach at this time. To account for limitations in current methods to 355855 purchasing prevalence, the current study provides a new strategy for estimating the prevalence of sex buying behavior using a double list experiment and a direct ask
question.  

Conclusion:
While limited, the body of research concerning sex trafﬁcking, sex work and prostitution is growing and providing new insights into commercialized sex. Amid increasing national and international de-
bates concerning legalization and decriminalization, the ﬁndings of this study are especially relevant. This study demonstrates that responding were honest about their behavior, and under anonymous research conditions will be truthful about sex buying behavior. Future research should examine attitudes of both buyers and non-buyers to fully understand their views on paying for sex. Moving beyond prevalence estimates, it is critically important that research turn towards accurate transaction and ﬁnancial ﬁgures. Sample size restrictions limit this study to a simple calculation of 4million transactions by the average rate ($120) totaling $430,000,000 during the past 3years. When considering the number of repeat buyers [57% of solicitors] and extrapolating the scope of the market, the sex industry could feasibly produce 10 million transactions and yield a billion dollars in 3 years. Future work exploring ﬂuctuating rates along with transaction information will produce empirical estimates of the true ﬁnancial value of the sex work industry. Finally, expanding upon this study, researchers should examine the gender preferences of sex purchasers. Our ﬁndings show that almost 20% of buyers are interested in same sex?
